---
title: Visualising the spread of a hypothetical pandemic | Prasanta Kumar Dutta

description: Visualising a simulated contagion spill from the Amazon rainforest that could lead to the next pandemic.

keywords: Globe visualisation, Simulation, Pandemic visualisation, Data Journalist, Graphics Journalist, Reuters Graphics Journalist, Data Visualisation Developer, Data Visualization Developer, Narrative Cartographer, User Interface Designer, User Experience Designer, Communication Designer, Data Storyteller, Information Designer, Graphic Designer, Art Director, User-centered design, UX, UI, Data Artist, Web Designer, Web Developer, Front-end Web Developer, Photographer, Traveller, Creative writer, Electronics and Communication Engineer, National Institute of Design, National Institute of Technology Durgapur, Prasanta, PrasantaKrDutta, Prasanta Kumar Dutta, Prasanta KrDutta, pkddapacific, pkd.dapacific, pkd_da_pacific, daPacific.

image: bats-pandemic.webp
type: project
date: '2023-05-16'
published: false

categories:
  - Reuters
  - Data Visuallisation
  - Infographics


links: 
  - type: project
    url: https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/global-pandemic-bats-spread/
    label: 📔 View Project
    target: _blank

  - type: doc
    url: projects/bats-pandemic/
    label: 🗒️ Read more

intro:

  hed: Visualising the spread of a hypothetical pandemic

  dek: "Reuters published a five-part special report that dives deep into how human destruction of wild areas is amplifying pandemic risk from bats. For the project, data reporters worked with specialists to develop an epidemiological simulation using disease dynamics, population size and density, regional commuting patterns, and worldwide airline traffic to understand how a contagion spill from the Amazon might prove catastrophic—a scenario scientists say could easily happen.

  <br/>
  I had the opportunity to design and develop this visualisation for the story. "

  img: projects/bats-pandemic/hero.webp

  duration: 10 weeks

  url: 'https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/global-pandemic-bats-spread/#bats-brazil-scrolling-section'

  client: Reuters

  quote: “If you’re not looking for a novel virus, you’re not seeing it” — Ana Pastore y Piontti, co-author, Charting the Next Pandemic
---

<script>
  import Container from '$lib/components/ui/Container/index.svelte';
  import LinkButton from '$lib/components/ui/LinkButton/index.svelte';
  import OverflowImage from '$lib/components/ui/OverflowingImage/index.svelte';

  import Award from '$lib/components/custom/projects/ProjectAward/index.svelte';
  import Map from '$lib/components/custom/projects/AndrettaMap/index.svelte';
</script>

<style lang='scss'>
  @import 'src/lib/styles/mixins/index';

</style>

<Container width=md>

## Creative brief

To understand how a novel pathogen spilling out of the Amazon might spark the next pandemic, Reuters used an epidemiological model to simulate the spread of a virus even more contagious as COVID-19 – a scenario scientists say could easily happen. I was tasked with coming up with a visualisation that shows the phenomena and its global impact using the narration of the hypothetical virus.

## The simulation dataset

The simulation, modelled by the data team using <LinkButton label='GleamViz'  url='https://www.gleamviz.org/' /> – a simulator for epidemiological modelling, produced two simple datasets --

* <p>Seedings: a list of source and target cities that the virus spread to from day 0 to day 180.</p>
  
* <p>Infections: cases estimated in every city and daily global totals.</p>
  
If you are curious about how the data was generated by the simulation, you can read more about it <LinkButton label='here'  url='https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/global-pandemic-bats-methodology/' />.

</Container>

// Preview of the two datasets as viewed on Google Sheets.

<Container width=md>

## Understanding the data

Since the data included geographic coordinates, my first response was to load it up in QGIS–a geospatial analysis tool– to see what the spread of the cities looked like. It was evident that there was quite an overlap of cities—the same city turned into a transmitter once it was infected with the virus.

### What does the transmission look like?

I split the seedings into source and destination datasets and ran them through the hub-spoke algorithm in QGIS to generate virus “flight paths.” Animating those paths with the QGIS Temporal Controller tool gave me an overview of what was happening over a period of 180 days.

</Container>

// Animated view of the virus seedings in QGIS. It is evident that the transmission starts slowly in Brazil and then speeds up as it spreads all over the world.

// All seedings at the end of the 180 day period. It highlights that some cities (like national capitals, and tourist destinations) are hotspots of transmission.

<Container width=md>

Now that I had an overview of the data, I wanted to delve into the numbers for insights into the dynamics of the hypothetical spread. I loaded it up in an <LinkButton label='Observable Notebook'  url='https://observablehq.com/' /> —my tool of choice for data analysis beyond Microsoft Excel. I can use javascript array functions or d3-array methods to quickly transform and understand the data and then visualise insights using the Plot library.

The result, shown below, was a connected dot plot that served as a timeline for the spread. Each dot represents a city, and is coloured by country. The y-axis is the time scale—the number of days since the original outbreak. (Note that the lower values on the y-axis are early days, so the only dots are in grey, the colour of Brazil.) The x-axis is the number ID assigned to the cities for easy mapping of source and targets.

// A connected dot plot with cities (identified by a numeric ID) on the x-axis and days on the y-axis. Dots show the target city, coloured by country. A line shows a transmission on a particular day. This view helped visually narrow down when transmissions went international (longer lines) from Brazil (around day 60).

### When do most seedings occur around the world?

The data showed that the outbreak starts in South America and spreads first to North America before moving to Europe, Asia, and Africa. Transmissions peak after about three months of circulation.

// Distribution of the seedings grouped by continent.

### What do infection trends look like?

The spread of new cases follows an exponential trend as expected from a viral outbreak.

// Daily global infections–new cases (left) and cumulative (right).

## Ideating the narrative and the visuals

The primary aspect of the data was how the virus spreads over time and space. By focusing on these variables in the data, I drafted an outline, as follows:

* The virus started from Altamira, Brazil and got transmitted locally
* The virus broke free and moved to the US
* Eventually, it spread to Europe and Asia
* Cities emerged as viral hotspots
* Nearly the entire world is affected by the hypothetical pandemic

Secondary research
I looked at visualisations from Gleamviz and other sources for inspiration around epidemic visualisation. I found many geo-visualisations or network diagrams that show viral propagation.

</Container>

// Epidemic visualisation inspiration.

<Container width=md>

### Visual explorations and prototyping

I plotted the seedings using a d3-graph on Observable. One thing this graph doesn’t show is geography, which makes it hard to demonstrate some of the points in the narrative. It looks good though, as it visually resonates with the form of a virus.

</Container>
